abyssal_channel	Abyssal channels (also, deep-sea channels, underwater channels) are channels in Earth's sea floor. They are formed by fast-flowing floods of turbid water caused by avalanches near the channel's head, with the sediment carried by the water causing a build-up of the surrounding abyssal plains. Submarine channels and the turbidite systems which form them are responsible for the accumulation of most sandstone deposits found on continental slopes and have proven to be one of the most common types of hydrocarbon reservoirs found in these regions.
abyssal_fan	Abyssal fans, also known as deep-sea fans, underwater deltas, and submarine fans, are underwater geological structures associated with large-scale sediment deposition and formed by turbidity currents. They can be thought of as an underwater version of alluvial fans and can vary dramatically in size, with widths from several kilometres to several thousands of kilometres.
acritarchs	Acritarchs are organic microfossils, known from approximately 1800 million years ago to the present. Their diversity reflects major ecological events such as the appearance of predation and the Cambrian explosion.
aeolian_depositional_environment	Aeolian depositional environments are processes due to wind activity. Often in deserts and coastal regions and well sorted, large scale cross-beds, in continental environments.
agglutinated_foraminifera	Foraminifera tests made from small pieces of sediment cemented together (agglutinated) by either proteins, calcium carbonate, or Iron (III) oxide.
agglutinated_fossil	Fossils of foraminifera tests made from small pieces of sediment cemented together (agglutinated) by either proteins, calcium carbonate, or Iron (III) oxide.
aller_halite_formation	The Aller Halite Formation consists of halite with subordinate interbedded and intergrown K/Mg salts and saliferous mudstones. The halite is generally colourless, locally orange, pink, yellow, white or grey, coarsely crystalline, transparent to translucent, occasionally opaque and moderately hard.
alluvial_channel	An alluvial river is one in which the bed and banks are made up of mobile sediment and/or soil. Alluvial rivers are self-formed, meaning that their channels are shaped by the magnitude and frequency of the floods that they experience, and the ability of these floods to erode, deposit, and transport sediment.
alluvial_depositional_environment	Alluvium (from the Latin alluvius, from alluere, "to wash against") is loose, unconsolidated (not cemented together into a solid rock) soil or sediment that has been eroded, reshaped by water in some form, and redeposited in a non-marine setting.
alluvial_fan	An alluvial fan is an accumulation of sediments shaped like a section of a shallow cone, with its apex at a point source of sediments, such as a narrow canyon emerging from an escarpment. They are characteristic of mountainous terrain in arid to semiarid climates, but are also found in more humid environments subject to intense rainfall and in areas of modern glaciation
amundsen_formation	The Amundsen Formation consists dominantly of light to dark grey, noncalcareous to calcareous, bioturbated siltstones and mudstones which are locally carbonaceous and pyritic. In the easternmost part of the East Shetland Basin, the lower part of the formation frequently has more calcite-cemented sedimentary_rocks
andesite	Andesite is an extrusive igneous volcanic rock of intermediate composition, with aphanitic to porphyritic texture. In a general sense, it is the intermediate type between basalt and rhyolite.
andesite_lava	Expelled molten Andesite rock, an extrusive igneous volcanic rock.
anhydrite	Anhydrite, or anhydrous calcium sulfate, is a mineral with the chemical formula CaSO4.
auk_formation	Reddish brown or grey aeolian sandstones constitute most of the Auk Formation. Normally the sandstones are cemented by hematite and authigenic clay, but dolomite and anhydrite are locally important cements, as is kaolinite. Locally the uppermost few metres of sandstone have been tightly cemented by porewaters that percolated from overlying Upper Permian strata.
backshore_depositional_environment	The backshore area of a beach extends from the limit of high water foam lines to dunes or extreme inland limit of the beach. It is only affected by waves during exceptional high tides or severe storms.
bacton_group	The term Bacton Group comprises of beds lying between the top of the Zechstein (Permian) and the base of the Haisborough Group. The group comprises the Bunter Shale Formation overlain by the Bunter Sandstone Formation; the former includes the Bröckelschiefer, Amethys t and Rogenstein members, but the Bunter Sandstone Formation is undivided.
balder_formation	The Balder Formation consists of light to dark grey, generally fisile, carbonaceous, pyritic mudstone with abundant tuff layers in the lowest part. The mudstone is well laminated in the lower part, with light to medium grey indurated siliceous mudstone alternating with medium to dark grey soft, fissile mudstone. In the upper part, the mudstone is fissile, but soft and poorly laminated. In parts of the Viking Graben, the tuff-rich mudstones include thin reddish grey layers, often with diffuse boundaries, and often associated with minor bioturbation. The tuffs mostly occur as thin layers up to a few centimetres in thickness, with sharp bases and commonly displaying normal size grading; these are interpreted as undisturbed air-fall tuffs.
banks_group	The term Banks Group includes the Raude/Eirikson and Nansen members, respectively, of the Statfjord Formation, and were not assigned to a group. The term 'Statfjord Group' has been applied informally to the Banks Group in some Beryl Embayment wells. The Banks Group represents a dominantly arenaceous, essentially fluvial/coastal depositional system. The sediments are transitional between the continental red beds of the underlying Triassic Cormorant Formation and the marine mudstones, siltstones and minor sandstones of the Dunlin Group.
basalanhydrit_formation	In marginal, shelf sections, the Basalanhydrit Formation typically consists of white to pale grey, amorphous, microcrystalline anhydrite and argillaceous anhydrite with local intercalations of pale grey to pale brown microcrystalline dolomite and argillaceous dolomite.
basalt	Basalt is a mafic extrusive igneous rock formed from the rapid cooling of lava rich in magnesium and iron exposed at or very near the surface of a terrestrial planet or a moon. More than 90% of all volcanic rock on Earth is basalt, and the eruption of basalt lava is observed by geologists at about 20 volcanoes per year.
beach_depositional_environment	A beach is a landform alongside a body of water which consists of loose particles. The particles composing a beach are typically made from rock, such as sand, gravel, shingle, pebbles. The particles can also be biological in origin, such as mollusc shells or coralline algae.
beatrice_formation	The Beatrice Formation consists of fine to medium grained sandstones interbedded with subordinate shelly mudstones. The succession generally consists of upward-coarsening units, commonly between five and seven in number. Upward-fining units are also present in some sections. In general, the upward-coarsening units display an upward transition from dark grey, micaceous, carbonaceous and pyritic mudstones, with local shell debris, through grey and brown, fine-grained, flaser-bedded and ripple-laminated silty sandstones to clean, fine to medium grained, locally oolitic, cross-bedded or parallel-laminated sandstones.
beauly_formation	The Beauly Formation is a unit of sandstone, mudstone and in-situ lignite that occurs at the top of the Moray Group along the northwestern margin of the North Sea Basin.
blakeney_formation	The Blakeney Formation consists of mudstones with interbedded thin anhydrites and localized thin sandstones. The mudstones are commonly dolomitic and anhydritic and usually red-brown, but locally grey or mottled with grey and pale green.
bosies_bank_formation	The Bosies Bank Formation is largely composed of white and reddish brown sandstone and siltstone, and reddish brown, red, and greenish grey mudstone. Minor intercalations of limestone, dolomitic limestone and anhydrite have been recorded near the basinward limit of the formation.
bowland_shale_formation	The Bowland Shale Formation is characterized by thick, often homogeneous sections of dark grey to black mudstone, with minor beds of dark grey siltstone, and rare partings of pale brown or light grey dolomitic limestone, of possible diagenetic origin. Some sections contain a few stringers of white or brownish grey sandstone. The mudstones are generally described as being firm to hard, and blocky to sub-fissile; they are commonly carbonaceous and occasionally pyritic.
brae_formation	The Brae Formation comprises dominantly greyish brown, medium to coarse grained sandstone and conglomerate interbedded with fine-grained sandstones, mudstones and mud-matrix supported breccias. Six major facies identified by Turner et al. (1987) in the Brae Formation of the southern part of Block; Sand-matrix conglomerate facies, Mud-matrix breccia facies, Medium to thick bedded sandstone facies, Alternating thin-bedded sandstones and interlaminated sandstone-mudstone facies, Interlaminated mudstone-sandstone facies, Laminated mudstone facies.
breccia	Breccia is a rock composed of broken fragments of minerals or rock cemented together by a fine-grained matrix[1] that can be similar to or different from the composition of the fragments. The word has its origins in the Italian language, in which it means either "loose gravel" or "stone made by cemented gravel". A breccia may have a variety of different origins, as indicated by the named types including sedimentary breccia, tectonic breccia, igneous breccia, impact breccia, and hydrothermal breccia.
brent_group	The Brent Group has five constituent formations are recognized: the Broom Formation, Rannoch Formation, Etive Formation, Ness Formation and Tarbert Formation. The group forms a broadly regressive-transgressive wedge of coastal and marine sediments, recording the progradational outbuilding and subsequent retreat of a deltaic system. The basal Broom Formation represents laterally derived fan-delta deposits, whilst the overlying Rannoch and Etive formations record shallow-marine shoreface and barrier-bar systems sourced.
brig_formation	The Brig Formation is largely composed of primary red beds, but also contains a thin basal unit of coal measures in many sections. The red-bed unit consists of alternating grey, reddish-brown, or white sandstones and reddish brown, purple, or occasionally waxy, greenish grey mudstones and silty mudstones.
britannia_sandstone_formation	The Britannia Sandstone Formation consists of sandstones with interbedded mudstones. The sandstones are pale grey or tan coloured and mainly fine to medium, but locally coarse grained. They vary from hard to friable, with a patchy calcareous cement. Reworked Jurassic and Barremian microflora are common. The interbedded mudstones are typical of the Valhall and Carrack formations.
broom_formation	The Broom Formation in the type section is characterized by pale grey to brown, coarse-grained, poorly sorted conglomeratic sandstone containing mudstone clasts.
brora_coal_formation	The Brora Coal Formation consists of interbedded dark grey, carbonaceous, waxy mudstones and greenish grey sandy mudstones, sandstones and coals. The mudstones contain sideritic spheres up to 1mm in diameter and display convolute bedding. The sandstones are white to pale grey, well sorted and very fine to medium grained, with cross-beds and ripple lamination. They have sharp bases, and grade upwards into mottled, biourbated and veined mudstone with rootlets and coaly zones. Individual sandstone units are generally up to about 6m thick.
bunter_sandstone_formation	The Bunter Sandstone Formation comprises red, orange, occasionally white or colourless, sandstones, interbedded with red, grey, rarely green, occasionally dolomitic, mudstone and silty or sandy mudstone. The sandstone varies from fine to coarse, and contains varying amounts of dolomitic or anhydritic cements.
bunter_shale_formation	The Bunter Shale Formation consists predominantly of red, red-brown, and some grey mudstones and shales. In basin margin areas, sandstones interbedded with silty mudstones, this passes distally into mudstones with siltstone and some dolomite interbeds and traces of anhydrite, and is characterized by the presence of calcareous oolitic beds (rogenstein). The lowest beds of the formation comprise redbrown, silty, dolomitic or anhydritic, mudstones.
burton_formation	The Burton Formation consists of dark grey to reddish grey, soft, slightly carbonaceous, non-calcareous mudstones. Ooliths have been recorded in the mudstones in the upper part of the formation in well 3/4-8. Sandstones occur locally, but their distribution is patchy and difficult to predict. Individual sandstone units usually have an aggregate thickness of only a few metres or so. The sandstones vary from very fine to coarse grained and are varicoloured, argillaceous, and frequently kaolinitic and/or calcareous.
caister_coal_formation	The Caister Coal Formation is composed of grey mudstones and silty mudstones, with varying proportions of seat earths, coal seams, and sandstone beds. One or more marine bands of dark grey or black shale may also be present towards the base of the formation, as such are present in onshore Westphalian.
calcareous_fossil	Calcareous is an adjective meaning "mostly or partly composed of calcium carbonate", in other words, containing lime or being chalky. The term is used in a wide variety of scientific disciplines.
calcareous_nannofossils	Calcareous nannofossils include the coccoliths and coccospheres of haptophyte algae and the associated nannoliths which are of unknown provenance. The organism which creates the coccosphere is called a coccolithophore, they are phytoplankton (autotrophs that contain chloroplasts and photosynthesise). Their calcareous skeletons are found in marine deposits.
carbonate	A carbonate is a salt of carbonic acid characterized by the presence of the carbonate ion, a polyatomic ion. The name may also refer to a carbonate ester, an organic compound containing the carbonate group.
carboniferous	The Carboniferous is a geologic period and system that spans 60 million years from the end of the Devonian Period 358.9 million years ago (Mya), to the beginning of the Permian Period, 298.9 Mya. The name Carboniferous means "coal-bearing".
carboniferous_period	The Carboniferous Period is a geologic period and system that spans 60 million years from the end of the Devonian Period 358.9 million years ago (Mya), to the beginning of the Permian Period, 298.9 Mya. The name Carboniferous means "coal-bearing".
carrack_formation	The Carrack Formation consists of essentially non-calcareous, carbonaceous, pyritic, micaceous mudstones and siltstones with localised mass-flow sandstones. The mudstones are mainly medium to dark grey to black, but locally red-brown colours are present. They are firm to hard and blocky to fissile.
cementstone_formation	The Cementstone Formation consists of sandstones and shaly mudstones with thin beds of dolomite and dolomitic limestone. The sandstones are grey or white, are thinly bedded and mainly fine grained.
cenozoic_era	The Cenozoic is the current and most recent of the three geological eras of the Phanerozoic Eon. It follows the Mesozoic Era and extends from 66 million years ago to the present day. It is generally believed to have started on the first day of the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event.
central_north_sea	Central region of the North Sea, a sea of the Atlantic Ocean.
chalk	Chalk is a soft, white, porous, sedimentary carbonate rock, a form of limestone composed of the mineral calcite. Calcite is an ionic salt called calcium carbonate.
chalk_group	The Chalk Group is a unit of chalky limestone lying between the Humber and Cromer Knoll groups in the UK Southern North Sea. The Chalk Group contains five named formations, Ekofisk Formation, Herring Formation, Hidra Formation, Mackerel Formation and Tor Formation
chert	Chert is a hard, fine-grained sedimentary rock composed of microcrystalline (or cryptocrystalline) crystals of quartz. Chert is typically composed of the petrified remains of siliceous ooze, the biogenic sediment that covers large areas of the deep ocean floor, and which contains the silicon skeletal remains of diatoms, silicoflagellates, and radiolarians.
chitinozoans	Chitinozoa are a taxon of flask-shaped, organic walled marine microfossils produced by an as yet unknown animal.
clinoforms	Clinoforms are defined as sloping depositional surfaces. They are deposited free from wave disturbance and where the continental shelf has regressed as sea level falls. Clinoform composition is primarily mud dominant and fossils are non-abundant.
coal	Coal is a combustible black or brownish-black sedimentary rock, formed as rock strata called coal seams. Coal is mostly carbon with variable amounts of other elements; chiefly hydrogen, sulfur, oxygen, and nitrogen.
coaly_shale	A shale with significant coal deposits present. A sedimentary rock formed in compaction.
coastal_plain	A coastal plain is flat, low-lying land adjacent to a sea coast.
coastal_to_shallow_marine_depositional_environment	The transition from coastal to shallow marine environments.
conglomerate	Conglomerate is a clastic sedimentary rock that is composed of a substantial fraction of rounded to subangular gravel-size clasts. A conglomerate typically contain a matrix of finer grained sediments, such as sand, silt, or clay, which fills the interstices between the clasts. The clasts and matrix are typically cemented by calcium carbonate, iron oxide, silica, or hardened clay.
conodonts	Conodonts are extinct agnathan chordates resembling eels, classified in the class Conodonta.
continental_depositional_environment	The continental environment comprising of alluvial, aeolian, fluvial and lacustrine environments.
conybeare_group	The term Conybeare Group is introduced here for Westphalian coal measures and primary red beds of the Southern North Sea. These strata were gently folded, faulted, and variably eroded prior to deposition of overlying Lower Permian desert sediments (Rotliegend Group).
cook_formation	Cook Formation consists dominantly of grey siltstones and silty mudstones. Streaks of very fine grained and well sorted sand occur at some levels, with traces of muscovite, chlorite and glauconite. Calcite cement is present locally. Locally the succession includes thin beds of very fine to coarse grained, often argillaceous, micaceous and chloritic sandstone that constitute up to 20 per cent of individual sections.
cormorant_formation	The Cormorant Formation is composed of white, pale grey, greenish grey, brown, and reddish brown sandstones, with red, reddish brown, greenish grey, and minor dark grey, purple, and white mudstones, and sporadic thin limestones. Sections at the centre of the East Shetland Basin and Beryl Embayment are mudstone dominated, whereas those near the East Shetland Platform and Crawford Spur are sandstone dominated.
cretaceous	The Cretaceous is a geological period that lasted from about 145 to 66 million years ago (mya). It is the third and final period of the Mesozoic Era, as well as the longest.
cretaceous_period	The Cretaceous preiod is a geological period that lasted from about 145 to 66 million years ago (mya). It is the third and final period of the Mesozoic Era, as well as the longest.
cromer_knoll_group	The Cromer Knoll Group of the UK Central North Sea is revised to include a redefined Valhall Formation, the Rødby Formation and the new Carrack, Britannia Sandstone and Wick Sandstone formations. The Valhall, Carrack and Rødby formations are also recognized in the South Viking Graben, but Lower Cretaceous strata in the Beryl Embayment, North Viking Graben, Unst Basin, East Shetland Basin and Magnus Trough remain as undivided Cromer Knoll Group.
dacite	Dacite is an igneous, volcanic rock. It has an aphanitic to porphyritic texture and is intermediate in composition between andesite and rhyolite.
darwin_formation	The Darwin Formation is composed mainly of lenticular bedded grey siltstones and fine sandstones, although bioturbation has produced structureless sandy siltstones at a some levels. Very fine to coarse grained, more or less structureless, sandstones occur in thin (up to 0.6m thick), sharpbased beds, some apparently representing gutter casts. Thicker units (up to 1.3m), of well laminated, rippled, and occasionally bioturbated, very fine grained sandstones also occur. The sandstones are mineralogically and texturally similar to those of the underlying Nansen Formation.
deep_marine_depositional_environment	Deep water marine environment is a flat area on the deep ocean floor (abyssal plains) caused by ocean currents. Common sediments are clay, carbonate mud, silica mud.
delta	A river delta is a landform created by deposition of sediment that is carried by a river as the flow leaves its mouth and enters slower-moving or stagnant water. This occurs where a river enters an ocean, sea, estuary, lake, reservoir, or (more rarely) another river that cannot carry away the supplied sediment.
delta_front_depositional_environment	The connection between the river and the body of water it is entering.
delta_plain_depositional_environment	The plain the river delta meanders over.
deltaic_depositional_environment	A river delta is a landform created by deposition of sediment that is carried by a river as the flow leaves its mouth and enters slower-moving or stagnant water.
depositional_environment	depositional environment or sedimentary environment describes the combination of physical, chemical and biological processes associated with the deposition of a particular type of sediment and, therefore, the rock types that will be formed after lithification, if the sediment is preserved in the rock record. In most cases the environments associated with particular rock types or associations of rock types can be matched to existing analogues.
diatoms	Diatoms are a major group of algae, specifically microalgae, found in the oceans, waterways and soils of the world. Living diatoms make up a significant portion of the Earth's biomass.
dinoflagellates	The dinoflagellates are single-celled eukaryotes constituting the phylum Dinoflagellata.[5] Usually considered algae, dinoflagellates are mostly marine plankton, but they also are common in freshwater habitats. Their populations are distributed depending on sea surface temperature, salinity, or depth.
diorite	Diorite is an intrusive igneous rock composed principally of the silicate minerals plagioclase feldspar (typically andesine), biotite, hornblende, and/or pyroxene. The chemical composition of diorite is intermediate, between that of mafic gabbro and felsic granite. 
dolostone	Dolomite (also known as dolomite rock, dolostone or dolomitic rock) is a sedimentary carbonate rock that contains a high percentage of the mineral dolomite.
dornoch_formation	The Dornoch Formation consists of sandstone, siltstone and silty mudstone, with subordinate lignite and claystone in the uppermost part (Beauly Member). The sandstones range from fine to very coarse grade, with local conglomeratic beds, and are generally poorly consolidated. In parts of the Northern North Sea, the topmost bed of the formation is conglomeratic. The siltstones and mudstones are brown-grey to grey-brown, micaceous, carbonaceous, and pyritic. They are poorly consolidated and display little or no fissility.
dowsing_formation	The Dowsing Formation consists largely of mudstones but a significant amount of bedded halite is present, mostly concentrated in the widespread Rot Halite Member, near the base of the formation, and in the less extensive Muschelkalk Halite Member in the higher part of the formation. The mudstones are red, red-brown, orange-red and green, and silty in part; thin beds of anhydrite occur and beds of grey to buff coloured dolomite are more prominent than in the overlying Dudgeon Formation.
drake_formation	The Drake Formation typically consists of medium grey to dark grey, variably silty and sandy and variably calcareous mudstone. The uppermost few metres or so locally contain mudstone clasts, floating sand grains, or thin beds of sandstone. In some sections, a discrete bed of coarse-grained sandstone of 'Broom-type' is developed some 0.15 to 0.20m below the top of the formation. Thin beds of oolitic ironstone are recorded from some sections. 
dudgeon_formation	The Dudgeon Formation consists largely of mudstones but a concentration of halite in the upper part of the sequence, constitutes the Keuper Halite Member; thin halite beds also occur lower in the formation. The mudstones are red, red-brown, orange-red, and green; some silty interbeds and thin beds of anhydrite, and grey to buff dolomite occur.
dunlin_group	The term Dunlin Group includes four formations, the Amundsen, Burton, Cook and Drake formations. The group is extended to include two additional formations, the Speke Formation in the Unst Basin and the Darwin Formation in the Beryl Embayment. The five formations that occur in East Shetland Basin/Viking Graben/Beryl Embayment area are of marine facies, the Dunlin transgression having terminated the prolonged phase of non-marine sedimentation of the Heron Group. Marine conditions did not, however, reach the Unst Basin, where sediments of the Speke Formation are in non-marine facies.
dunrobin_bay_group	The term Dunrobin Bay Group is introduced for the Lower Jurassic arenaceous and argillaceous sediments of the Inner Moray Firth. It comprises the newly defined Golspie, Mains, Lady's Walk and Orrin formations. 
ekofisk_formation	The Ekofisk Formation typically consists of variably cemented chalky limestone, composed largely of the remains of coccoliths and calcareous microfossils. Argillaceous chalky limestone units, indicated by higher gamma responses, are also present; these appear to consist of limestone with thin, discrete, clay layers. Fine to medium grained, moderately to well sorted sandstones are present locally; they are distinguished from the associated limestones by their higher gamma values and generally by lower velocity and resistivity. Units of reworked chalk occur locally within the Ekofisk Formation in southern parts of the Central Graben.
emerald_formation	The Emerald Formation consists of very fine to medium grained sandstone and subordinate siltstone, often with a thin basal conglomerate. Bivalve shell and belemnite fragments are common, and carbonised wood and plant fragments are also recorded. Bioturbation has destroyed most sedimentary structures. Some beds are calcite cemented, and glauconite has been recorded.
eocene	The Eocene Epoch is a geological epoch that lasted from about 56 to 33.9 million years ago (mya). It is the second epoch of the Paleogene Period in the modern Cenozoic Era.
etive_formation	The Etive Formation consists of brown to grey, massive, fine to medium grained, clean, cross-bedded sandstones
evaporites	Evaporite is the term for a water-soluble mineral sediment that results from concentration and crystallization by evaporation from an aqueous solution. There are two types of evaporite deposits: marine, which can also be described as ocean deposits, and non-marine, which are found in standing bodies of water such as lakes. Evaporites are considered sedimentary rocks and are formed by chemical sediments.
farne_group	The term Fame Group is introduced here for the Dinantian to early Namurian succession, largely of lacustrine, fluvial, coal-measures, and ' Yoredale' facies, that extends offshore from the Northumberland coast over the western crestal area and the southern flank of the Mid North Sea High. The Fame Group is divided into four formations, three of which are named after their onshore equivalents, the Cementstone, Fell Sandstone, and Scremerston Coal groups of the Northumberland Trough. The overlying Yoredale Formation s named after the Yoredale cycles.
fell_sandstone_formation	The Fell Sandstone Formation is characterized by massive, pale grey and white, fine to medium or coarse grained, poorly sorted sandstones. However, it also contains sporadic beds of grey, blocky to subfissile, non-calcareous mudstone that are up to 10m thick, and occasional beds of dark grey, pyritic, carbonaceous mudstone.
findhorn_formation	The Findhorn Formation is composed largely of very fine to fine grained, occasionally medium or coarse grained, argillaceous, locally micaceous, sandstones. The sandstones are moderately or poorly sorted, and reddish brown or, less commonly, pale grey in colour. They are mainly cemented by anhydrite or kaolinite and are mostly non-calcareous. Subsidiary beds, up to 5m thick, of darker reddish brown or greenish grey mudstone or siltstone are present. Calcareous sandstones and thin beds of limestone have been noted in several wells. In the south of the quadrant, in particular, the gamma-ray response is irregular, suggesting an alternation of thinly bedded clean sandstones, argillaceous sandstones and mudstones.
fladen_group	The Fladen Group was defined to encompass the coal-bearing Pentland Formation and the volcanic Rattray Formation in the Central North Sea and South Viking Graben. The definition of the group is significantly changed in this study. Four formations, Pentland, Brora Coal, Beatrice and Hugin formations, are included within the revised Fladen Group
flounder_formation	The Flounder Formation consists of pale to dark grey, occasionally pink to red, very calcareous mudstones, grading into pale to dark grey argillaceous chalky limestones. Thin beds of white brittle cryptocrystalline limestone are also present. The Flounder Formation has a similar wireline-log signature to the more argillaceous developments of the Mackerel Formation.
fluvial_channel	The downcutting process of deepening a stream channel by erosion of the bottom material.
fluvial_depositional_environment	Fluvial deposition during processes are associated with rivers and streams and the deposits and landforms created by them. 
fluvio_deltaic_depositional_environment	Depositional enviroment where a fluvial river and deltas deposit sediment.
fluvio_lacustrine_depositional_environment	Depositional enviroment where a fluvial river and lacustrine lake deposit sediment.
foraminifera	Foraminiferaare single-celled organisms, members of a phylum or class of amoeboid protists characterized by streaming granular ectoplasm for catching food and other uses; and commonly an external shell (called a "test") of diverse forms and materials. 
foreshore_depositional_environment	The intertidal zone, also known as the foreshore or seashore, is the area above water level at low tide and underwater at high tide (in other words, the area within the tidal range).
fossil	A fossil is any preserved remains, impression, or trace of any once-living thing from a past geological age. Examples include bones, shells, exoskeletons, stone imprints of animals or microbes, objects preserved in amber, hair, petrified wood, oil, coal, and DNA remnants. 
fraserburgh_formation	The Fraserburgh Formation generally consists of mudstone and siltstone with sporadic thin stringers of sandstone. Anhydrite nodules and patches of sandy dolomite have also been noted in a number of wells. The mudstones are mainly reddish brown or dark brown, but are occasionally grey; they are anhydritic and slightly calcareous. The siltstones are reddish brown, micaceous and slightly dolomitic. The sandstone stringers are argillaceous and anhydritic.
fulmar_formation	The Fulmar Formation consists dominantly of olive-grey to pale grey, fine to medium grained, occasionally pebbly, generally argillaceous or carbonatecemented, glauconitic sandstones. In cored sections, they are seen to be either massive with few structures or, in more distal sections, to be argillaceous and strongly bioturbated with a range of burrow types, including the distinctive forms Chondrites, Ophiomorpha and Thalassinoides. Soft-sediment deformation and water-escape structures also occur in the thicker sequences. Large-scale upward-coarsening or upward-fining successions are displayed in some sections. The sandstones are generally arkosic. Spicules of the siliceous sponge Rhaxella are common and bioclastic debris locally abundant.
gabbro	Gabbro is a phaneritic (coarse-grained), mafic intrusive igneous rock formed from the slow cooling of magnesium-rich and iron-rich magma into a holocrystalline mass deep beneath the Earth's surface
geochronologic_time	Geochronology is the science of determining the age of rocks, fossils, and sediments using signatures inherent in the rocks themselves.
geological_unit	A geological or stratigraphic unit is a volume of rock of identifiable origin and relative age range that is defined by the distinctive and dominant, easily mapped and recognizable petrographic, lithologic or paleontologic features (facies) that characterize it.
glacial_depositional_environment	Glacial deposition occurs when rock debris, either frozen within the glacier or lying on the surface, is deposited onto the ground by melting of ice.
gneiss	Gneiss is a common and widely distributed type of metamorphic rock. Gneiss is formed by high temperature and high-pressure metamorphic processes acting on formations composed of igneous or sedimentary rocks.
golspie_formation	The Golspie Formation consists dominantly of variegated, mottled mudstones with sporadic, thin, fine-grained sandstones. However, sections in the southeast are more sand-rich than those in the west. The mudstones are green, brick red, light grey and occasionally yellow, although they become predominantly red-brown with depth. They are occasionally calcareous, variably silty, and fissile, with desiccation cracks, rootlet horizons and rare plant material.
granite	Granite is a common type of felsic intrusive igneous rock that is granular and phaneritic in texture. Granites can be predominantly white, pink, or gray in color, depending on their mineralogy.
grauer_salzton_formation	The Grauer Salzton Formation consists of pale to dark grey, locally black and laminated, illitic, unfossiliferous mudstones. Chlorite and kaolinite and subsidiary minerals in the mudstones.
grenzanhydrit_formation	The Grenzanhydrit Formation consists of white, pale grey and pale orange or red-brown anhydrite that is variously described as soft and amorphous or hard and microcrystalline, sometimes friable, brittle or sucrosic. Locally the Grenzanhydrit Formation contains a unit of red-brown and grey anhydritic claystone and mudstone or white, yellow or red, clear to opaque halite.
grid_sandstone_member	The 'Grid Sandstone Member' consists of thinly or thickly bedded, fine to medium grained, locally coarse-grained sandstone, interbedded with mudstone, grey to green-grey and variably silty. The sandstone commonly includes minor amounts of glauconite, and is locally shelly.
haisborough_group	The Haisborough Group comprises the Dowsing Formation, which is overlain by the Dudgeon Formation, including the Keuper Halite Member. The Haisborough Group is dominantly argillaceous. The Dowsing Formation is more dolomitic in character than the succeeding Dudgeon Formation. These formations include three main concentrations of bedded halite which comprise the Rot and Muschelkalk halite members, in the Dowsing Formation, and the Keuper Halite Member, in the Dudgeon Formation.
halibut_carbonate_formation	The Halibut Carbonate Formation is a regionally variable unit. In many sections, it is composed of two carbonate units separated by a unit of anhydrite; in others it consists of carbonate alone.
halite	Halite commonly known as rock salt, is a type of salt, the mineral (natural) form of sodium chloride. Halite forms isometric crystals.
hauptanhydrit_formation	The Hauptanhydrit Formation consists of white or pale grey anhydrite. It is often described as soft and amorphous, or microcrystalline and hard.
hauptdolomit_formation	The lithofacies and thickness of the Hauptdolomit Formation were largely controlled by depositional environment, with thick shelf facies passing into a thin basinal facies. Shelf sections are composed mainly of very fine oolitic, pelletoidal, bioclastic and pisolitic grainstones, and hard, microcrystalline carbonate mudstones and locally contain a restricted fauna of bivalves, gastropods, foraminifera and ostracods.
heather_formation	The Heather Formation is composed dominantly of medium to dark grey to brown, marine mudstones and siltstones with sporadic thin stringers or concretions of pale grey-brown limestone or dolomitic limestone. The mudstones are commonly poorly fissile, soft to firm, and, because of the presence of calcareous microfossils, slightly to moderately calcareous. Locally, they are pyritic and carbonaceous. In the East Shetland Basin, the lower part of the formation is generally composed of hard, micaceous, calcareous silty mudstones, while the upper part is more carbonaceous and has more limestone stringers. The limestones are generally microcrystalline and hard, producing low-gamma / high-velocity spikes.
heron_group	The Heron Group is introduced for all Triassic deposits in the UK sector of the Central and Northern North Sea. The Heron Group is composed largely of continental clastic sediments that were deposited in rapidly subsiding Triassic intracratonic basins of the Central and Northern North Sea.
herring_formation	The Herring Formation consists of hard to very hard, dense, cryptocrystalline limestone with interbedded argillaceous chalky limestone and mudstone. Traces of pyrite, glauconite and chert have been reported. The limestones are white to pale grey, occasionally medium grey and buff. The mudstones are sub-fissile, carbonaceous, non-calcareous to calcareous, hard to soft, and finely laminated in part. They are dark grey to black and locally red-brown or varicoloured. In the South Viking Graben, thin, glauconitic, quartzose sandstones are present in the lower part of the Herring Formation.
hidra_formation	The Hidra Formation consists of fine-grained chalky limestones with interbedded mudstones. The limestones are white to pale grey and occasionally pink, red brown and pale green and variably argillaceous. The mudstones are dark grey and reddish brown. Thin, pale grey, glauconitic and calcareous, quartzose sandstones are locally present in the Inner Moray Firth and the South Viking Graben. Traces of chert are also present locally. The Hidra Formation becomes more argillaceous northwards, and in the North Viking Graben it grades laterally into the more argillaceous Svarte Formation
hopeman_sandstone_formation	The Hopeman Sandstone Formation is largely composed of clean sandstones. The sandstones are white, pale grey or red, and moderately to well sorted. Grain size is mainly fine or medium, but intervals of coarse, pebbly sandstone have been encountered in southernmost wells. The sandstones have silica, carbonate or anhydrite cements, and are only locally argillaceous. Reddish brown and greenish grey mudstones are interbedded with the sandstones.
horda_formation	The Horda Formation consists predominantly of mudstone with subordinate sandstone. The mudstone is typically green-grey to olive-grey, but grades to brown-grey in the siltier, proximal sections and near the top of the formation in the Outer Moray Firth and South Viking Graben. Grey-red to purple mudstones, grading to waxy claystones, are prominent in the lower parts of many distal, condensed sections, especially in the Central Graben.
hugin_formation	The Hugin Formation consists of sandstones, silststones and mudstones with minor coals and conglomerates. The Hugin Formation is variably fossiliferous, with non-marine and marine bivalves, belemnites and ammonites recorded.
humber_group	The Humber Group was defined two major, mudstone-dominated units within the Humber Group: the Heather Formation and the Kimmeridge Clay Formation. These are retained here, but with their mutual boundary more precisely defined. Four sandstone-dominated units (Brae, Emerald, Fulmar and Piper) are defined at formation level within the Humber Group. The Emerald, Fulmar and Piper formations consist of shallow-marine, shelf sandstones of tabular geometry. The Brae Formation represents a large-scale complex fan system, interdigitating with, rather than enclosed by, mudstones. 
igneous_extrusive_rock	Extrusive rock refers to the mode of igneous volcanic rock formation in which hot magma from inside the Earth flows out (extrudes) onto the surface as lava or explodes violently into the atmosphere to fall back as pyroclastics or tuff.
igneous_intrusive_rock	Intrusive rock is formed when magma penetrates existing rock, crystallizes, and solidifies underground to form intrusions, for example plutons, batholiths, dikes, sills, laccoliths, and volcanic necks.
igneous_rock	Igneous rock or magmatic rock, is one of the three main rock types, the others being sedimentary and metamorphic. Igneous rock is formed through the cooling and solidification of magma or lava. The magma can be derived from partial melts of existing rocks in either a planet's mantle or crust.
inge_volcanic_deposits_formation	Most of the Inge Volcanics Formation is composed of red and purple weathered tuffs and purple, reddish grey, and occasionally dark green basalts; the latter may include extrusive and intrusive rocks. The tuffs are hard and cindery, and they contain feldspar laths and occasional glassy shards.
inner_shelf_depositional_environment	Inner region of the continental shelf is a portion of a continent that is submerged under an area of relatively shallow water known as a shelf sea.
jorsalfare_formation	The Jorsalfare Formation consists of mudstones with interbedded argillaceous chalky limestones. The mudstones are pale grey to grey and usually calcareous. The limestones are argillaceous, chalky, white to pale grey, but locally red brown, fine grained and occasionally sandy and dolomitic. In the East Shetland Basin, the proportion of limestone relative to mudstone generally decreases to the north and east.
jurassic	The Jurassic is a geologic period and system that spanned 56 million years from the end of the Triassic Period 201.3 million years ago (Mya) to the beginning of the Cretaceous Period 145 Mya. The Jurassic period is divided into three epochs: Early, Middle, and Late. Similarly, in stratigraphy, the Jurassic is divided into the Lower Jurassic, Middle Jurassic, and Upper Jurassic series of rock formations.
jurassic_period	The Jurassic Period is a geologic period and system that spanned 56 million years from the end of the Triassic Period 201.3 million years ago (Mya) to the beginning of the Cretaceous Period 145 Mya. The Jurassic period is divided into three epochs: Early, Middle, and Late. Similarly, in stratigraphy, the Jurassic is divided into the Lower Jurassic, Middle Jurassic, and Upper Jurassic series of rock formations.
kupferschiefer_formation	The Kupferschiefer Formation is typically composed of dark grey or dark brown silty, fissile mudstones, which are locally black and carbonaceous. The shales are variably calcareous, and they are commonly micaceous in the Inner Moray Firth. In the Argyll Field, the Kupferschiefer Formation is composed of dark grey dolomitic mudstones that are sapropelic, dolomicritic, well indurated, thinly laminated and subfissile, and contain stringers and veins of pyrite.
kyrre_formation	The Kyrre Formation typically comprises a thick, monotonous sequence of mudstones with sporadic limestone stringers. The mudstones are grey, silty, slightly calcareous and occasionally pyritic, glauconitic and micaceous. The limestones are off-white to pale brown, argillaceous, chalky and locally dolomitic.
lacustrine_depositional_environment	A lake is an area filled with water, localized in a basin, surrounded by land, apart from any river or other outlet that serves to feed or drain the lake.
ladys_walk_formation	The Lady's Walk Formation consists mainly of dark to medium grey calcareous, micaceous mudstones with thin-shelled bivalves, ammonites, crinoids and belemnites. One or more upward-fining units of fine-grained sandstone and siltstone is present in many sections. The basal contacts of the upward-fining sandstones are burrowed. Trace fossils, including Diplocraterion and Teichnichnus are present.
lagoonal_depositional_environment	Lagoonal depostions occur in a shallow body of water separated from a larger body of water by barrier islands or reefs. Little transportation, creates lagoon bottom
lark_formation	The Lark Formation consists of a monotonous succession of brown-grey to grey-brown mudstone, silty in part, and locally grading upwards into sandstones of the Skade Formation. Thin sandstones of presumed shelf origin occur near the base of the Lark Formation in the South Viking Graben.
leine_halite_formation	The Leine Halite Formation consists of colourless, white, grey or pink, clear to translucent, locally opaque, generally hard and crystalline halite with interbedded and intergrown pink to red, opaque, hard K/Mg salts, principally sylvite and carnallite with some polyhalite. Minor beds of white to grey, soft to moderately hard, crystalline to amorphous anhydrite and red-brown to pale grey-brown, locally silty, saliferous, soft and amorphous mudstone have been recorded.
limestone	Limestone is a carbonate sedimentary rock that is often composed of the skeletal fragments of marine organisms such as coral, foraminifera, and molluscs. Its major materials are the minerals calcite and aragonite, which are different crystal forms of calcium carbonate.
lista_formation	The mudstone facies of the Lista Formation is characterized by noncalcareous, blocky, bioturbated, non-carbonaceous and non-pyritic mudstone. In deeper parts of the basin the mudstone is extremely fine grained, grading to true claystone, often with irregular, listric fracture surfaces. The associated sandstones are variable in character. They mostly range from fine to medium grade and display varying degrees of cementation.
lithostratigraphic_unit	Lithostratigraphy is a sub-discipline of stratigraphy, the geological science associated with the study of strata or rock layers. Major focuses include geochronology, comparative geology, and petrology. In general a stratum will be primarily igneous or sedimentary relating to how the rock was formed.
lossiehead_formation	The Lossiehead Formations composed of reddish brown, white and pale grey sandstones and reddish brown, olive-grey, grey and purple mudstones and siltstones. In the south of the area, the sandstones fine upwards from mainly fine to medium grained, but occasionally coarse and pebbly at the base, to very fine or fine grained. Further north, the sandstones are mainly very fine or fine grained throughout. Sorting is poor or moderate, and the sandstones are variably argillaceous and variably calcareous.
lower_carboniferous	The Lower Carboniferous is the first epoch of the Carboniferous Period in the geologic timescale.
lower_coastal_plain	The lower region of the coastal plain, a flat, low-lying land adjacent to a sea coast.
lower_cretaceous	The Lower Cretaceous is the first epoch of the Cretaceous Period in the geologic timescale.
lower_cretaceous_epoch	The Lower Cretaceous epoch is the first epoch of the Cretaceous Period in the geologic timescale.
lower_jurassic	The Lower Jurassic is the first and initial epoch of the Jurassic Period in the geologic timescale.
lower_jurassic_epoch	The Lower Jurassic Epoch is the first and initial epoch of the Jurassic Period in the geologic timescale.
lower_permian	The Lower Permian is the first and initial epoch of the Permian Period in the geologic timescale.
lower_shoreface_depositional_environment	Lower Shoreface refers to the portion of the seafloor, and the sedimentary depositional environment, that lies below the everyday wave base.
lower_triassic	The Lower Triassic is the first and initial epoch of the Triassic Period in the geologic timescale.
lower_triassic_epoch	The Lower Triassic Epoch is the first and initial epoch of the Triassic Period in the geologic timescale.
macbeth_formation	The Macbeth Formation consists of mudstones with interbedded limestones. The mudstones are pale to dark grey, calcareous to non-calcareous and occasionally very silty, micaceous, glauconitic and pyritic. The limestones are chalky and argillaceous, white to pale grey or brownish grey, and locally glauconitic. In the Viking Graben and East Shetland Basin, the limestone units are up to about 60m thick, but both the proportion of limestone and the thickness of individual limestone beds tend to decrease northwards and away from contemporary structural highs.
mackerel_formation	The Mackerel Formation consists of white, pale grey, and occasionally pink or red, fine-grained, and commonly argillaceous chalky limestones. Sections with relatively high amounts of detrital clay are reflected in higher gamma values and lower velocity. The formation becomes more argillaceous towards the South Viking Graben, where it grades laterally into the Flounder Formation.
mains_formation	The Mains Formation consists of interbedded white to pale grey sandstones,muddy siltstones and grey to black organic mudstones. The upward-fining sandstones are fine to coarse grained. They are locally very calcareous and more thickly bedded than sandstones in the underlying Golspie Formation, although in the Beatrice Field the sandstone beds are rarely more than 1.5m thick. The interbedded mudstones contain an abundant flora and fauna. In some wells the formation consists dominantly of sandstone whereas in others it contains a large proportion of mudstone. Core from the Mains Formation shows cross-bedded and current-ripple bedded sandstones with burrowed mudstones and rootlet horizons.
marble	Marble is a metamorphic rock composed of recrystallized carbonate minerals, most commonly calcite or dolomite. Marble is typically not foliated, although there are exceptions. In geology, the term marble refers to metamorphosed limestone, but its use in stonemasonry more broadly encompasses unmetamorphosed limestone.
marine_depositional_environment	Deposits in a marine setting.
marl	Marl or marlstone is a carbonate-rich mud or mudstone which contains variable amounts of clays and silt. The term was originally loosely applied to a variety of materials, most of which occur as loose, earthy deposits consisting chiefly of an intimate mixture of clay and calcium carbonate, formed under freshwater conditions. 
matter	In classical physics and general chemistry, matter is any substance that has mass and takes up space by having volume.
maureen_formation	The Maureen Formation is lithologically heterogeneous, including mudstone, siltstone, sandstone, and reworked limestone. The mudstone is light to medium grey and calcareous in the lower part, and characterized in cores by conspicuous, usually dark grey, Zoophycos burrows, preserved as thin inclined layers with distinctive chevron markings in cross-section. Some of the more silty mudstones include abundant chaotically distributed clasts of mudstone and chalky limestone. Some of the limestone clasts are angular; others are well rounded and often display superficial glauconite staining.
mesozoic_era	The Mesozoic is one of three geologic eras of the Phanerozoic Eon, preceded by the Paleozoic ("ancient life") and succeeded by the Cenozoic ("new life"). The era is subdivided into three major periods: the Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous, which are further subdivided into a number of epochs and stages.
metamorphic_foliated_rock	Foliated metamorphic rocks arise from the transformation of existing rock types, in a process called metamorphism, which means "change in form",
metamorphic_non_foliated_rock	Non-foliated metamorphic rocks arise from the transformation of existing rock types, in a process called metamorphism, which means "change in form",
metamorphic_rock	Metamorphic rocks arise from the transformation of existing rock types, in a process called metamorphism, which means "change in form",
mid_carboniferous	The Mid Carboniferous is the second and middle epoch of the Carboniferous Period in the geologic timescale.
mid_triassic	The Mid Triassic is the second and central epoch of the Triassic Period in the geologic timescale.
middle_jurassic	The Middle Jurassic is the second and central epoch of the Jurassic Period in the geologic timescale.
middle_jurassic_epoch	The Middle Jurassic Epoch is the second and central epoch of the Jurassic Period in the geologic timescale.
middle_triassic	The Middle Triassic is the second and central epoch of the Triassic Period in the geologic timescale.
middle_triassic_epoch	The Middle Triassic Epoch is the second and central epoch of the Triassic Period in the geologic timescale.
millstone_grit_formation	The Millstone Grit Formation is composed of variable proportions of grey, white and brown sandstone, and grey or dark grey, partly carbonaceous mudstone and siltstone. Some sections additionally contain rare thin coal seams and seatearths.
montrose_group	The Montrose Group has two constituent formations: the Maureen Formation and the Lista Formation. The base of the Maureen Formation is taken at the change from chalky limestone or marl of the Chalk Group or Shetland Group to a more variable succession of thinly interbedded marl and limestone with local sandstone. The base of the overlying Lista Formation is typically defined by an upward transition from dark, carbonaceous, and often silty and fragmental, mudstone to finer grained medium to dark green-grey mudstone, commonly interbedded with sandstone in the lower part.
moray_group	The Moray Group is characterized by grey to grey-brown, carbonaceous, pyritic mudstones and siltstones that contrast with the greenish mudstones of the overlying Stronsay Group and the underlying Montrose Group. The group is also characterized by a relatively sharp transition between a 'shelf' succession dominated by sandstone and siltstone, with subordinate lignite, and a 'basinal' succession dominated by mudstone. The shelf succession is assigned to the Dornoch Formation and the basinal succession to the Sele Formation and the Balder Formation.
mousa_formation	The Mousa Formation consists predominantly of poorly consolidated, variably glauconitic, locally shelly, fine to coarse grained sandstone. In some sections, the sandstones are massively bedded (e.g. 15/21-1), whereas in others they are interbedded with thin mudstones.
mudstone	Mudstone, a type of mudrock, is a fine-grained sedimentary rock whose original constituents were clays or muds. Mudstone is distinguished from shale by its lack of fissility (parallel layering). The term mudstone is also used to describe carbonate rocks (limestone or dolomite) that are composed predominantly of carbonate mud.
nansen_formation	The Nansen Formation consists of fine to coarse grained, fairly well sorted, occasionally calcite-cemented, more or less pebbly/granulitic, white to light brown sandstones. In cored sections, individual beds are often seen to fine upwards above sharp bases. Quartzose granules and pebbles are frequently concentrated as basal lags in such upwardfining beds. Cross-bedding is recorded in places. The presence of horizontal and vertical burrows and wave-ripple lamination. Thin mudstone beds containing marine fossils occur in places.
neogene	The Neogene  is a geologic period and system that spans 20.45 million years from the end of the Paleogene Period 23.03 million years ago (Mya) to the beginning of the present Quaternary Period 2.58 Mya.
neogene_period	The Neogene Period is a geologic period and system that spans 20.45 million years from the end of the Paleogene Period 23.03 million years ago (Mya) to the beginning of the present Quaternary Period 2.58 Mya.
ness_formation	The Ness Formation consists of a heterolithic sequence of interbedded sandstones, siltstones, mudstones and coals. The sandstones are variable in character; those interbedded with siltstones and mudstones, particularly in the lower parts of the formation, are typically thinly bedded, parallel laminated, ripple laminated, or hummocky cross-laminated. They are also bioturbated and often micaceous.
non_foliated_rocks	Rocks that possess a texture are referred to as foliated.
northern_north_sea	Northern region of the North Sea, a sea of the Atlantic Ocean.
obsidian	Obsidian is a naturally occurring volcanic glass formed as an extrusive igneous rock. Obsidian is produced when felsic lava extruded from a volcano cools rapidly with minimal crystal growth.
oligocene	The Oligocene is a geologic epoch of the Paleogene Period and extends from about 33.9 million to 23 million years before the present (33.9±0.1 to 23.03±0.05 Ma). The Oligocene is preceded by the Eocene Epoch and is followed by the Miocene Epoch.
open_marine	The region of deeper marine ocean beyond the continental shelf.
organic_rich_shale	Organic-rich sedimentary rocks are a specific type of sedimentary rock that contains significant amounts (>3%) of organic carbon. The most common types include coal, lignite, oil shale, or black shale. 
organic_walled_fossil	Organic walled fossils or acritarchs. This term describes almost any small organic walled fossil – from the egg cases of small metazoans to resting cysts of many different kinds of green algae.
orrin_formation	The Orrin Formation consists of pale to dark grey argillaceous siltstones, coarsening upwards into fine-grained, bioturbated, carbonaceous, kaolinitic sandstones and massive, fine to medium grained, silicacemented sandstones with occasional cross-bedding. The sandstones as sub-arkosic to quartz-arenitic. Two major upward-coarsening sandstone units, on the basis of gamma-log character, overlain by a thin but persistent fossiliferous mudstone that is in turn capped by a major cross-bedded sandstone unit. Thin coals and rootlet horizons are recorded within the mudstone unit.
ostracods	Ostracods, or ostracodes, are a class of the Crustacea (class Ostracoda), sometimes known as seed shrimp. Some 70,000 species (only 13,000 of which are extant) have been identified.
outer_shelf_depositional_environment	The outer shelf is the further extent of the continental shelf than has estended into the marine environment. It is preceeded by the inner shelf, and connects to the abyssal plain.
paleocene	Palaeocene, is a geological epoch that lasted from about 66 to 56 million years ago (mya). It is the first epoch of the Paleogene Period in the modern Cenozoic Era.
paleogene_period	Palaeogene, or informally Lower Tertiary or Early Tertiary, is a geologic period and system that spans 43 million years from the end of the Cretaceous Period 66 million years ago (Mya) to the beginning of the Neogene Period 23.03 Mya. It is the beginning of the Cenozoic Era of the present Phanerozoic Eon.
paleozoic_era	Paleozoic Era is the earliest of three geologic eras of the Phanerozoic Eon. It is the longest of the Phanerozoic eras, lasting from 541 to 251.902 million years ago, and is subdivided into six geologic periods (from oldest to youngest): the Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, Carboniferous, and Permian. 
palynomorphs	Palynomorphs are broadly defined as organic-walled microfossils between 5 and 500 micrometres in size. 
pegmatitanhydrit_formation	The Pegmatitanhydrit Formation consists of distinctive, white to grey, occasionally pale orange anhydrite that is variably soft, firm or hard, amorphous or crystalline (sucrosic) to microcrystalline. Locally the formation may contain interbedded halite or dark red-brown mudstone.
pegmatite	A pegmatite is an igneous rock, formed underground, with interlocking crystals usually larger than 2.5 cm in size (1 in). Most pegmatites are found in sheets of rock (dikes and veins) near large masses of igneous rocks called batholiths.
pentland_formation	The Pentland Formation displays a complex association of sedimentary and volcanic rocks. The sediments consist of interbedded sandstones, siltstones, mudstones, and coals; the volcanic rocks include tuffs, lavas and intrusives.
peridotite	Peridotite is a dense, coarse-grained igneous rock consisting mostly of the minerals olivine and pyroxene. Peridotite is ultramafic, as the rock contains less than 45% silica. It is high in magnesium, reflecting the high proportions of magnesium-rich olivine, with appreciable iron.
permian	The Permian is a geologic period and system which spans 47 million years from the end of the Carboniferous period 298.9 million years ago (Mya), to the beginning of the Triassic period 251.902 Mya. It is the last period of the Paleozoic era; the following Triassic period belongs to the Mesozoic era. 
permian_period	The Permian period is a geologic period and system which spans 47 million years from the end of the Carboniferous period 298.9 million years ago (Mya), to the beginning of the Triassic period 251.902 Mya. It is the last period of the Paleozoic era; the following Triassic period belongs to the Mesozoic era. 
phanerozoic_eon	The Phanerozoic Eon is the current geologic eon in the geologic time scale, and the one during which abundant animal and plant life has existed. It covers 541 million years to the present. The Phanerozoic is divided into three eras: the Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic.
phosphatic_fossil	Phosphatic fossilization has occurred in unusual circumstances to preserve some extremely high-resolution microfossils in which careful preparation can even reveal preserved cellular structures. Large quantities of phosphate are required, either from seawater or from the tissues of the decaying organism.
phyllite	Phyllite is a type of foliated metamorphic rock created from slate that is further metamorphosed so that very fine grained white mica achieves a preferred orientation. It is primarily composed of quartz, sericite mica, and chlorite.
piper_formation	The Piper Formation consists mainly of fine to coarse grained, poorly cemented sandstone units, interbedded with sporadic dark marine mudstones. Sporadic very thin coal seams are reported in core descriptions. Five main lithofacies have been described from the formation: bioturbated, fossiliferous marine mudstones, with thin, poorly sorted, very fine grained glauconitic sandstones at their base; bioturbated, silty, fine-grained sandstones with broken bivalves and belemnites; well sorted, massive to cross-bedded, bioturbated, medium-grained sandstones with sporadic shelly debris; well sorted, massive to planar bedded, coarse-grained sandstones; and upwardfining, very coarse to coarse grained cross-bedded sandstones.
plattendolomit_formation	The Plattendolomit Formation consists dominantly of dark to pale grey or tan, hard, microcrystalline, locally argillaceous, partly pelleted and anhydritic dolomite mudstones.
pollen_spores	Pollen and spores are dispersed by plants as part of their life cycle. They are abundant and well preserved in the fossil record, and provide extensive, continuous records of ecological and environmental change.
prodelta_depositional_environment	The part of a river delta that is furthest offshore and in which deposition is slowest.
pumice	Pumice, called pumicite in its powdered or dust form, is a volcanic rock that consists of highly vesicular rough textured volcanic glass, which may or may not contain crystals. It is typically light colored. Scoria is another vesicular volcanic rock that differs from pumice in having larger vesicles, thicker vesicle walls and being dark colored and denser.
quartzite	Quartzite is a hard, non-foliated metamorphic rock which was originally pure quartz sandstone.
quaternary Quaternary	is the current and most recent of the three periods of the Cenozoic Era in the geologic time scale of the International Commission on Stratigraphy. It follows the Neogene Period and spans from 2.588 ± 0.005 million years ago to the present.
quaternary_period	Quaternary is the current and most recent of the three periods of the Cenozoic Era in the geologic time scale of the International Commission on Stratigraphy. It follows the Neogene Period and spans from 2.588 ± 0.005 million years ago to the present.
radiolarians	The Radiolaria, also called Radiozoa, are protozoa of diameter 0.1–0.2 mm that produce intricate mineral skeletons, typically with a central capsule dividing the cell into the inner and outer portions of endoplasm and ectoplasm. The elaborate mineral skeleton is usually made of silica.
rannoch_formation	In the northern part of the East Shetland Basin, the Rannoch Formation consists of an upward-coarsening succession from mudstone (Rannoch Mudstone unit) to very fine or fine grained sandstone. To the south, where the Rannoch mudstone is absent, the Rannoch Formation consists of an upwardcoarsening sandstone succession.
reefal_depositional_environment	A shoal of rock, sand, coral or similar material, lying beneath the surface of water caused by waves and tidal currents. Also creates adjacent basins. Common sediments are carbonates.
rhyolite	Rhyolite is an igneous, volcanic rock, of felsic (silica-rich) composition. It may have any texture from glassy to aphanitic to porphyritic.
rock	Rock is a naturally occurring solid aggregate of minerals or mineraloids. It is categorized by the minerals included, its chemical composition and the way in which it is formed. Rocks are usually grouped into three main groups: igneous rocks, metamorphic rocks and sedimentary rocks. Rocks form the Earth's outer solid layer, the crust.
rodby_formation	The Rødby Formation consists of calcareous mudstones and chalky mudstones with sporadic thin beds of argillaceous limestone. The mudstones and chalky mudstones are soft to hard, blocky to fissile, micromicaceous, glauconitic and sometimes silty. They are mainly pale to dark grey, but commonly red-brown, brick red, olive-grey and dark brown. The red colours are more often developed in the lower and upper parts of the formation. The interbedded limestones are white to pale grey, tan and red-brown to pink, firm, argillaceous and microcrystalline.
rotersalzton_formation	The Roter Salzton Formation consists of red-brown, occasionally purple-brown to grey, commonly silty, soft to firm, amorphous to blocky mudstones. The formation contains varying quantities of interbedded clear, colourless to pale pink-orange, massive halite and bright orange-red, opaque, massive, hard potassium and salts.
rotliegend_group	Most of the Rotliegend Group consists of sandstones, mudstones and local basal conglomerates deposited in an arid or semi-arid, tropical-desert environment. These sediments rest unconformably on strata ranging from Early Devonian to early Namurian in age; they are overlain either by Upper Permian marine sediments and evaporites of the Zechstein Group or they locally subcrop post-Permian strata. The Rotliegend Group is divided into four formations, the Findhorn and Inge Volcanics formations, are new. The Auk Formation comprises up to 500m of reddish brown and grey aeolian sandstones and minor water-lain sands and conglomerates. The Fraserburgh Formation, deposited in a contemporary desert sabkha.
salt	Halite commonly known as rock salt, is a type of salt, the mineral (natural) form of sodium chloride (Na Cl). Halite forms isometric crystals.
sandstone	Sandstone is a clastic sedimentary rock composed mainly of sand-sized (0.0625 to 2 mm) silicate grains. Sandstones make up about 20 to 25 percent of all sedimentary rocks. Most sandstone is composed of quartz or feldspar (both silicates)
schist	Schist is a medium-grade metamorphic rock formed from mudstone or shale. Schist has medium to large, flat, sheet-like grains in a preferred orientation.
schooner_formation	The Schooner Formation consists of sandy coal measures overlain by primary red beds. The coal measures are composed of mudstones and silty mudstones, with beds of grey, pale brown or white sandstone and occasional seat earths and coal seams. The mudstones are mainly grey, but reddish brown and purple beds also occur locally near the top of the unit.
scolt_head_formation	The Scolt Head Formation consists of mudstones with interbedded anhydrite. Stringers of sandstone are locally present. The mudstones and siltstones are commonly dolomitic and anhydritic and usually red-brown, but locally grey or mottled with grey and pale green. They vary from soft to firm, laminated and subfissile to amorphous and waxy. The anhydrite beds vary from soft, white and amorphous to pale grey, microcrystalline or sucrosic.
scoria	Scoria is a highly vesicular, dark-colored volcanic rock that may or may not contain crystals (phenocrysts). It is typically dark in color (generally dark brown, black or purplish red), and basaltic or andesitic in composition. 
scremerston_formation	The Scremerston Formation comprises alternations of sandstone, siltstone, mudstone and coal, with occasional thin dolomite or limestone beds. The sandstones are white, grey, brown or reddish brown, argillaceous and micaceous.
sedimentary_rock	Sedimentary rocks are types of rock that are formed by the accumulation or deposition of small particles and subsequent cementation of mineral or organic particles on the floor of oceans or other bodies of water at the Earth's surface. The particles that form a sedimentary rock are called sediment, and may be composed of geological detritus (minerals) or biological detritus (organic matter). 
sedimentary_rocks	Sedimentary rocks are types of rock that are formed by the accumulation or deposition of small particles and subsequent cementation of mineral or organic particles on the floor of oceans or other bodies of water at the Earth's surface. The particles that form a sedimentary rock are called sediment, and may be composed of geological detritus (minerals) or biological detritus (organic matter).
sele_formation	The Sele Formation is characterized by medium to dark grey, carbonaceous, pyritic, fissile mudstone, commonly with fine-scale colour lamination. Locally, the mudstone is pale grey, siliceous and blocky, though still finely laminated. Sporadic, thin, altered tuff layers are present, especially in the lower and upper parts. Sandstone units are developed at various levels within the mudstone succession. These are fine to coarse grained and are sharply differentiated from the associated mudstones. The thicker and more continuous sandstone units are given formal member status within the Sele Formation
shale	Shale is a fine-grained, clastic sedimentary rock, composed of mud that is a mix of flakes of clay minerals and tiny fragments (silt-sized particles) of other minerals, especially quartz and calcite. Shale is characterized by breaks along thin laminae or parallel layering or bedding less than one centimeter in thickness, called fissility. It is the most common sedimentary rock.
shallow_marine_depositional_environment	Shallow water marine environment refers to the area between the shore and deeper water, such as a reef wall or a shelf break. This environment is characterized by oceanic, geological and biological conditions, as described below. The water in this environment is shallow and clear, allowing the formation of different sedimentary structures, carbonate rocks, coral reefs, and allowing certain organisms to survive and become fossils.
shallow_marine_to_deep_marine_depositional_environment	The tranisitional region between shallow marine and deeper marine environments
shearwater_salt_formation	The Shearwater Salt Formation, though dominated by halite, includes significant components of sulphate minerals (particularly anhydrite and polyhalite) and chlorides (sylvite and carnallite) in most wells.
shelf_depositional_environment	A shelf or continental shelf is a portion of a continent that is submerged under an area of relatively shallow water known as a shelf sea. Much of these shelves has been exposed during glacial periods and interglacial periods.
shetland_group	The Shetland Group is a unit of mudstone with relatively minor interbedded argillaceous limestones lying between the Cromer Knoll and Montrose groups in the Northern North Sea.
shoreface_depositional_environment	The shoreface (or underwater platform) on flat coasts encompasses in its narrow sense that area which is subject to the constant action of moving water. This means that the landward boundary between shoreface and beach is the line of the average low-water mark. 
siliceous_fossil	Siliceous fossils are fossils that have silica (SiO2) as the principal constituent.
silicoflagellates	Silicoflagellates or Dictyochales are a small group of unicellular heterokont algae, found in marine environments. In one stage of their life cycle, they produce a siliceous skeleton, composed of a network of bars and spikes arranged to form an internal basket. These form a small component of marine sediments, and are known as microfossils from as far back as the early Cretaceous.
siltstone	Siltstone is a clastic sedimentary rock that is composed mostly of silt. It is a form of mudrock with a low clay mineral content, which can be distinguished from shale by its lack of fissility.
skade_formation	The Skade Formation consists of fine to coarse grained, often shelly sandstone with subordinate beds of brown silty mudstones or siltstone.
skagerrak_formation	The Skagerrak Formation in the north Central Graben, in the South Viking Graben, and in the Outer Moray Firth outliers, mostly comprises a monotonous continental red-bed sequence of fluvial sandstones and subordinate thinly bedded siltstones and mudstones. In the south Central Graben, three distinctive mudstone units interdigitate with the sandstones, enabling the Skagerrak Formation to be subdivided into six widely correlatable sandstone and mudstone members.
slate	Slate is a fine-grained, foliated, homogeneous metamorphic rock derived from an original shale-type sedimentary rock composed of clay or volcanic ash through low-grade regional metamorphism. It is the finest grained foliated metamorphic rock.
slope_depositional_environment	The slope describes the continental shelf beneath the sea, the gently declines into deeper ocean. Shallow water marine environment - processes due to waves and tidal currents, creates shelves and slopes, lagoons. 
smith_bank_formation	The Smith Bank Formation is composed dominantly of mudstones with minor siltstones, but includes a few thin beds of sandstone and occasional partings or nodules of carbonate or anhydrite in most sections. The mudstones are mostly brick red in colour, but subsidiary greenish-grey and grey mudstones also occur, sometimes comprising mottled horizons or reduction spots.
southern_north_sea	The Southern region of the North Sea, a sea of the Atlantic Ocean.
speke_formation	The formation is characterized by interbedded, varicoloured but often grey-green sandstones, mudstones and siltstones with minor marls and limestones. The sandstones are fine to coarse grained, variably sorted and micaceous.
spiculite	A siliceous-rock composed predominantly of sponge spicules and with porosity greater than 50%.
stassfurt_halite_formation	The Stassfurt Halite Formation consists of halite with subordinate interbedded anhydrite, polyhalite and kieserite. Minor amounts of carnallite are also present near the top of the formation. The halite is generally coarsely crystalline, transparent to translucent, locally coloured orange or pink, and occasionally white and opaque. The anhydrite is interbedded and intergrown with the halite and is generally white and amorphous to microcrystalline.
statfjord_formation	The Statfjord Formation consists of interbedded sandstones, siltstones, mudstones and, in some sections, minor coals. In the East Shetland Basin, the sandstone beds are light grey to white, fine to very coarse grained, sometimes pebbly, micaceous, variably kaolinitic and sometimes cross-bedded. Sandstone beds are more easily correlatable between wells in the upper part of the formation than in the lower part.
stotfield_calcrete_formation	The Stotfield Calcrete Formation is composed mainly of white, pale grey, or occasionally pale brown limestone, which is microcrystalline or cryptocrystalline, and massive or platy. White, pale brown, or bluish grey chert is commonly also encountered in cuttings, and forms the infill of stylolites and veins. few thin beds of pale grey or yellowish orange mudstone are intercalated within the limestones.
stronsay_group	The Stronsay Group is characterized by a relatively sharp differentiation between a sandstone and siltstone dominated shelf succession and a mudstone-dominated basinal succession. On this basis, two formations are recognized: the Mousa Formation and the Horda Formation. These formations represent a considerable time-span, ranging from the early Eocene to the earliest Oligocene.
subtidal_platform	Subtidal environments are below the tidal range and above storm wave base.
svarte_formation	The Svarte Formation consists of calcareous mudstones with interbedded argillaceous chalky limestones. In the North Viking Graben and East Shetland Basin, the proportion of limestone within the formation generally decreases northwards and away from contemporary high structures. The mudstones are typically medium to pale grey and occasionally micaceous, glauconitic and pyritic. The argillaceous chalky limestones are mainly white to medium grey deposited_in
tarbert_formation	The Tarbert Formation typically consists of grey to brown, relatively massive, fine to medium grained, locally calcite-cemented sandstone, with subordinate thin siltstones, mudstones and coals. The formation is lithologically variable across the East Shetland Basin, but in general is dominated by very fine to fine grained, bioturbated sandstone or, where bioturbation is less intense (usually higher in the vertical succession), by micaceous, parallel-laminated to hummocky cross-stratified, very fine to fine grained sandstone.
tay_sandstone_member	Thinly or thickly bedded, clean to argillaceous, fine to medium grained sandstones, interbedded with variably silty, fissile, green-grey to grey mudstones and siltstones. Thin turbidite sandstones occur within the mudstone units.
tidal_depositional_environment	Tidal environments occur in a wide variety of settings (e.g., directly facing the open sea/ocean, in Estuaries, in lagoons behind barrier islands, near tidal inlets) and contain a supratidal zone, an intertidal zone (tidal flats), and tidal channels.
tidal_flat_depositional_environment	Tidal flats, are coastal wetlands that form in intertidal areas where sediments have been deposited by tides or rivers.
tidal_platform	Tidal platforms, similar to tidal flats, are coastal wetlands that form in intertidal areas where sediments have been deposited by tides or rivers.
tor_formation	The Tor Formation typically consists of homogeneous, white or pale grey, tan or pink chalky limestones. Locally, however, softer argillaceous chalky limestones are interbedded with the harder, purer limestones. Cored sections reveal the presence of beds of relatively porous, slumped and chaotically bedded chalky limestone; these are marked by low velocity peaks and by distinctive porosity and dipmeter log responses. These reworked facies comprise the main reservoir intervals in the oilfields of the Norwegian Central North Sea.
transitional_depositional_environment	The transitional depositional region between the continental depositional environment and the marine depositional environment.
triassic	The Triassic is a geologic period and system which spans 50.6 million years from the end of the Permian Period 251.9 million years ago (Mya), to the beginning of the Jurassic Period 201.3 Mya. The Triassic is the first and shortest period of the Mesozoic Era. Both the start and end of the period are marked by major extinction events. The Triassic period is subdivided into three epochs: Early Triassic, Middle Triassic and Late Triassic.
triassic_period	The Triassic period is a geologic period and system which spans 50.6 million years from the end of the Permian Period 251.9 million years ago (Mya), to the beginning of the Jurassic Period 201.3 Mya. The Triassic is the first and shortest period of the Mesozoic Era. Both the start and end of the period are marked by major extinction events. The Triassic period is subdivided into three epochs: Early Triassic, Middle Triassic and Late Triassic.
triton_formation	The Triton Formation consists largely of mudstones but a significant amount of anhydrite is present in the lower and middle parts, and some thin beds of buff or green dolomite occur in the upper part. The mudstones are mainly red and red-brown, but some grey-green beds are present and the top of the formation is predominantly grey-green. The anhydrite is white, grey or colourless and occurs in thin beds.
tuff	Tuff is a type of rock made of volcanic ash ejected from a vent during a volcanic eruption. Following ejection and deposition, the ash is lithified into a solid rock.Rock that contains greater than 75% ash is considered tuff, while rock containing 25% to 75% ash is described as tuffaceous.
turbidity-flow_deposit	Oceanic turbidity currents are sediment laden waters situated over sloping ground will flow down-hill because they have a higher density than the adjacent waters.  they often have a "snow-balling-effect", as they stir up the ground over which they flow, and gather even more sedimentary particles in their current. Their passage leaves the ground over which they flow scoured and eroded. Once an oceanic turbidity current reaches the calmer waters of the flatter area of the abyssal plain (main oceanic floor), the particles borne by the current settle out of the water column.
turbot_anhydrite_formation	The Turbot Anhydrite Formation is largely composed of anhydrite, but includes a widespread argillaceous unit (the Hake Mudstone Member) and local developments of carbonate. A few thin beds of argillaceous, mainly fine or medium grained sandstone have been recorded near its lateral transition to the Bosies Bank Formation. The anhydrite is typically white or pale grey, but is occasionally orange, pink or red, and it sometimes contains laminae of red or grey mudstone.
upper_carboniferous	The Upper Carboniferous is the second and last epoch of the Carboniferous Period in the geologic timescale. It is a member of the Paleozoic Era.
upper_coastal_plain	The upper region of a coastal plain or flat, low-lying land adjacent to a sea coast.
upper_cretaceous	The Upper Cretaceous is the second and last epoch of the Cretaceous Period in the geologic timescale. It is a member of the Mesozoic Era.
upper_cretaceous_epoch	The Upper Cretaceous epoch is the second and last epoch of the Cretaceous Period in the geologic timescale. It is a member of the Mesozoic Era.
upper_jurassic	The Upper Jurassic is the third and last epoch of the Jurassic Period in the geologic timescale. It is a member of the Mesozoic Era.
upper_jurassic_epoch	The Upper Jurassic is the third and last epoch of the Jurassic Period in the geologic timescale. It is a member of the Mesozoic Era.
upper_permian	The Upper Permian is the second and last epoch of the Permian Period in the geologic timescale. It is a member of the Paleozoic Era.
upper_triassic	The Upper Triassic is the third and last epoch of the Triassic Period in the geologic timescale. It is a member of the Mesozoic Era.
upper_triassic_epoch	The Upper Triassic epoch is the third and last epoch of the Triassic Period in the geologic timescale. It is a member of the Mesozoic Era.
uppershoreface_depositional_environment	The upper region of the shoreface, below the sea, connected to the beach on the continental shelf.
valhall_formation	The Valhall Formation consists of interbedded calcareous mudstones, chalkymudstones and thin limestones with localized, sometimes thick, sandstones and conglomerates. The mudstones and chalky mudstones are usually soft to firm, blocky, locally sandy and silty, micromicaceous, glauconitic, pyritic and carbonaceous. They are generally pale to dark grey in colour, but grey-green and red-brown colours also occur. Thin, but widespread units of black, laminated, non-calcareous mudstone are developed at two levels. The limestones are hard to soft, microcrystalline or argillaceous and locally microlaminated or sandy. 
volcanic_depositional_environment	A volcanic deposit environment contains a volcano and the deposits from eruptions. A volcano, a rupture in the crust of a planetary-mass object, such as Earth, that allows hot lava, volcanic ash, and gases to escape from a magma chamber below the surface.
volcanic_deposits	A volcanic deposit forms from a volcano, a rupture in the crust of a planetary-mass object, such as Earth, that allows hot lava, volcanic ash, and gases to escape from a magma chamber below the surface.
volcanic_tuff	Volcanic tuff is a type of rock made of volcanic ash ejected from a vent during a volcanic eruption. Following ejection and deposition, the ash is lithified into a solid rock.
werraanhydrit_formation	The Werraanhydrit Formation are characterized by thick anhydrite with subordinate interbedded dolomite and halite. The anhydrite is generally described as white or yellowish white to pale grey, soft to hard, amorphous or massive and microcrystalline with sporadic argillaceous beds.
westoe_coal_formation	The Westoe Coal Formation is dominated by grey mudstones and silty mudstones, but contains varying proportions of seat earths, coal seams, and sandstone beds. Beds of dark grey or black marine mudstone form a minor component of most sections.
westray_group	The Westray Group is characterized by a relatively symmetrical basin fill, with no sharp differentiation into shelf and basin lithofacies; the greatest thicknesses occur in central parts of the North Sea Basin. Two formations are recognized: the Skade Formation, dominated by shelf sands, and the Lark Formation, dominated by basin mudstones. The succession shows an overall progradation, such that the shallow marine sandstones of the Skade Formation extend basinwards over mudstones of the Lark Formation.
whitehurst_group	The term Whitehurst Group is introduced for strata, mostly Namurian in age, that are broadly equivalent to the Bowland Shale and Millstone Grit groups. The terms Bowland Shale Formation and Millstone Grit Formation are formally defined here as the offshore lithofacies equivalents of these groups. The Bowland Shale Formation is composed of basinal mudstones, whereas the Millstone Grit Formation encompasses a range of turbidite, delta-slope, deltaic, and fluvial braidplain facies.
wick_sandstone_formation	The Wick Sandstone Formation consists of sandstones with interbedded siltstones and mudstones. The sandstones are very fine to coarse grained and pebbly, locally argillaceous and poorly sorted. They are pale grey to greybrown and dominantly consist of translucent to clear quartz. Glauconite grains, carbonaceous debris and lignite clasts are widespread. The sandstones are generally poorly consolidated, but very calcareous concretions are common and are marked on wireline logs by high velocity spikes. The mudstones and siltstones are similar to those of the Valhall Formation.
yoredale_formation	The Yoredale Formation is characterized by marine limestones and mudstones occurring within a dominantly deltaic association of mudstones, siltstones, sandstones, and occasional thin coal seams. The sandstone beds are white, pale grey, or pale brown, mostly less than 15m thick.
zechstein_group	The Zechstein Group is here divided into five formations. The Kupferschiefer Formation is retained for thin marine shales of the basal Upper Permian transgression. The Halibut Bank and Turbot Bank formations are renamed the Halibut Carbonate and Turbot Anhydrite formations, and are redefined. The Shearwater Salt Formation is introduced for the thick halites, polyhalites and subsidiary salts at the centre of the Northern Permian Basin. These salts have been so extensively mobilized by post-Permian halokinesis that their primary depositional sequence and thickness are generally unknown. The Bosies Bank Formation is introduced for Upper Permian clastic sections around the northwestern margin of the Northern Permian Basin.
zechsteinkalk_formation	The Zechsteinkalk Formation includes a wide range of carbonate lithofacies that accumulated in ramp, shelf, slope and basinal settings. In ramp, shelf, and slope sections, the Zechsteinkalk Formation is thickly developed and typically consists of two, broad facies. Firstly, pale grey-brown, hard, variably dolomitised, locally argillaceous and pelletoidal carbonate mudstones. These commonly pass up into carbonate grainstones, which are oolitic, pelletoidal and dolomitized.